It's time to turn it up.
Let's get it, bro.
Let's go.
Come on.
[Applause]
Let's go.
Come on.
Good one.
All right. Top work is done. 2x5 on
80 kgs. I quite like this number. Look
how nice it looks. The goal was to leave
a rep in reserve on everything. And I
think that I succeeded. We're kind of
building back to heavy, but not quite
that that heavy, like 200 kg. Uh
hopefully we're there in the next few
weeks, but I've been off heavy benching
for the last month or so because of
shoulder pain and I can happily say no
shoulder pain. So today I want to talk
to you about structural balance. What is
structural balance? The idea is to have
a balanced physique with equal amount of
muscularity and strength on the upper
body to the lower body, the front of the
body to the back of the body, the right
of the body to the left of the body.
Now, this is a concept that you may be
familiar with, may not. If you're not,
I'll introduce you. Firstly, I'll start
with where I learned about it, and that
was from my early mentor, Charles
Polloquin. Sadly, he's passed away, but
he's arguably one of the best personal
trainers ever. this concept of
structural balance, the way that he
taught it is different to the way that I
apply it with my coaching and my own
training. So the way that he taught it
was he's got some tests where basically
for the upper body, your bench press is
the benchmark. Close grip bench press
with a 4-second eccentric and flat feet,
no arch. Close grip means biochromial
width grip. Call that 100%. So that's
your benchmark. And then all of the
other lifts need to be a certain
percentage based on that. So what are
those lifts? I could have the
percentages slightly off, but roughly
incline press should be 91% of that.
Your dips should be, it's like 116% of
that. That includes your body weight
plus the additional weight. Pull-ups, I
think it's 80 something%. Bicep curl,
46% for one rep. Dumbbell external
rotation, 9.8%
for eight reps. And the idea is if any
of those numbers are off, so usually
most people are dominant with their
bench press because most people favor
that lift. And if the other lifts aren't
are a lower percentage than the ones
that I just mentioned, that's an
imbalance. And by strengthening the
other lifts so that they are up to par
with those percentages, then as a result
of being more balanced, your bench press
numbers would increase. So that's
basically how I'm paraphrasing the
lessons taught by Charles Polloquin to
me with upper body. Lower body has its
own percentages as well. Now, in my
experience, those percentages are just
I've never really achieved them with
myself or any of the athletes that I've
worked with. I love to have them as a
guide kind of like everything that I
learn about. So whether it's scientific
research or whatever it is, I don't just
say, "Well, this is what the science
said says, so this is what it must be."
I let it guide me to make more informed
decisions. So with those percentages, I
have a decent understanding of roughly
kind of where I should be, but if I'm
not at those percentages, I don't get
upset about it. And the way that I apply
it is slightly different. The way that I
apply it is by simply prescribing an
equal amount of volume to all of those
components of the body. So in general,
50% of your volume is upper body, 50% is
lower body, 50% is front of body, 50% is
back of body. So how would I apply that
on my bench press session? An equal
amount of pulling to my pushing
exercises. So a very simplified way of
illustrating that is to say a pushpull
ratio of 1 one. Now, of course, that's
not perfect, and a lot of people get
upset thinking, "Oh, it can't be
onetoone because whatever." And I agree
it's not onetoone, but I don't get
upset. I I just think it's a very um
easy way of illustrating that I want to
be placing equal emphasis from my
pushing muscles to my pulling muscles.
It just seems logical to me. I want to
have equal amount of muscularity on the
muscles of the front of the body to the
muscles of the back of my body. I don't
want to have imbalances and I want my
right side to be as big and strong as my
left side. In bodybuilding and
aesthetics, the athletes are judged on
things like symmetry and proportion. So
having balance when it comes to
aesthetics is also quite important and
the best way of monitoring that
especially in the beginning is to apply
equal amount of volume and effort in all
of those sections. So I split that up
with my exercise selection into eight
categories. Four in the upper body, four
in the lower body. So upper body is
horizontal pushpull and vertical
pushpull. Lower body is two squat
patterns and two bend patterns. So the
squat patterns are hip dominant squat
like low bar squats or leg presses or
long stride lunges and knee dominant
squat like a front squat or high bar
squat a stiletto squat or hack squat and
then the bend pattern. I have two
functions of the hamstrings which are
knee flexion and hip extension. So knee
flexion is like your hamstring curl
exercises, seated lane, nordic drops,
glute ham raise and then hip extension
are your RDL's good mornings 45°ree
hyperextensions. you may call them 90°.
So, equal amount of volume in each of
those categories is a general guide for
applying equal amount of effort and
energy into evenly spread out across my
entire body. Of course, I know some of
you at home who are into this type of
thing might be thinking, where's calves?
What about direct armwork and forearms
and and neck? Yes, okay, we do have
exceptions to this. It's not perfect and
there's not really a model that is
perfect, but that's kind of how I apply
it. Now, let's put this into practice.
So this is where I talk about structural
balance shouldn't be the goal of your
training. It should be a tool that we
use to help us make great decisions with
our long-term programming but the goal
shouldn't be to be balanced. I mean we
can work towards it just like you know
it's nice to say I want to be perfect
but perfection doesn't exist either
right so the way that we need to
consider it is we use it as a guide and
the way that I consider it if we were to
write a long-term training program is if
we get the long term further away from
our either peaking day or competition
day or whatever it is that we're
training for further away from that in
general we want things like accumulation
phases we want to be doing things like
more volume more variation of exercises
and then gradually over the course of
the long-term plan, we decrease the
volume so that we can gradually increase
the load. We're also decreasing
variation of exercise over the long term
so that we can increase specificity.
Now, I want you to think of variation
and specificity like the way that I
apply structural balance. So further
away from competition or peaking date, I
want you to factor in or how I do it
myself, I factor in more structural
balance because I know that as I get
closer to my peaking, one of the biggest
characteristics of peaking in strength
or getting ready for competition, say,
is to reduce fatigue by reducing volume
by eliminating the non-necessary
exercises. So like the variations, we
want to eliminate those. So for a
powerlifting competition or a
powerlifter, as we get closer to
competition, you're pretty much doing
squat, bench, and deadlift. and as
minimal as possible accessory exercises
to support that. And the accessory
exercises that you use are going to be
lowcost exercises like maybe leg
extensions, leg curls, maybe a little
little bit of arm isolation,
non-fatiguing exercises. But this is
where because we're not doing a lot of
variation of exercises, that's when it's
almost impossible to consider being
balanced with our programming. So as you
get closer to competition, you won't be
balanced. So, one of my favorite quotes
from a dear friend of mine and a mentor,
may he rest in peace, Dr. Andrew
Lockach. He taught me, if you want to be
balanced, be prepared to be a little bit
at everything. So, it's like, yeah,
that's so true. So, high performance,
high performance is extremely
unbalanced, right? So, what's balance
mean with high performance? It's not
just about training and and you know,
front of the body, back of the body,
upper body, lower body. It's also other
factors in your life. So this is where
we think about high performance requires
time away from things like family and
business. So when people talk about
things like work life balance, the most
successful business owners always laugh
at those things and say it's, you know,
there's no such thing as balance when it
comes to high performance in business.
Same with high performance in sport and
same with exactly what I'm talking about
here. So the closer you get to high
performance, the more unbalanced you're
going to be. So if you're not perfectly
balanced, if you're not following a
perfect principle of 1:1 pushpull ratio,
you're not a bad person. And that's kind
of like not what you should be doing as
you get closer to competition. However,
what about when you're not in
competition? This is where I say, so
further away from competition, we do
more volume. We do more variation. And
this is why I say you want to factor in
more balance work further away from
competition because you know that when
you get into your peaking phase, you're
not going to have the time, energy, or
effort to be spending on making sure
that we're perfectly balanced, right? So
further away from competition, those are
some of the things you want to be
factoring in. So, let's just say
furthest away from competition, some of
the things that I love to do is follow
that principle of push pull ratio of 1
one. And a lot of the times, if you've
been following my upper body sessions,
you'll see that I aim to kind of achieve
that loosely. So, one, what does that
mean? I just did two sets of five. Does
that mean I'm going to do two sets of
five on a pulling exercise? No. Because
I don't do five on pulling exercises
because those types of exercises don't
suit that low rep range. So, we got to
think about when we're prescribing reps,
a lot of people think things like,
"What's your favorite rep range to do
things?" as if you should only choose
one. And that's uh a big error because
all you do is choose one favorite
exercise, one favorite rep range. You're
missing out on so much value in in all
of your other exercises and rep ranges,
etc. So, what I consider when I'm
prescribing the right rep ranges for
exercises is the compatibility with the
specific exercise. Compound movements,
squat, bench press, and deadlift, they
kind of suit your one rep. And I say,
you know, 1 to six rep range, very
suitable. So when you're doing over six
reps for these big compound movements,
it starts getting a little bit funny,
right? I mean, of course you can, but
like 8, 10, 12 reps on big squats and
deadlifts and bench press. Bench press
more acceptable, but squats and
deadlifts, you don't really see it too
much at the highest level. And that's
because they're highly complex
movements. The more complex the
movements, the lower the reps should be.
But then you go to other exercises with
less complexity such as isolation
movements, leg extensions, leg curls,
bicep curls, tricep extensions. You
don't really do low rep range for a
number of reasons. One, if you do kind
of like one to six rep range with leg
extensions, your knees will hurt a lot.
You know, low rep range with your
hamstring curls. Um, you know, I haven't
done that in in a while. I haven't tried
to do that in a while, but I can imagine
it wouldn't feel too great. You wouldn't
feel too stimulating on the muscle,
right? So, I feel the same way about the
pulling pattern. So, so rows, pull-ups,
pull downs. I find that it's kind of not
just about like what does the sign say
about reps. It's more about how do I
feel after I do a set of those
exercises. How does the target muscles
feel after I perform a set of lat pull
downs or rows or whatever it might be?
If I was to do a five rep max on a lat
pull down, I'd probably walk out of the
machine feeling like my lats didn't
really feel much. Like they worked hard
and it was really hard, but you know,
didn't get the feel that I was after.
the lats and the midback muscles or
whatever the muscles that I was
targeting. Same with calf raises. Go and
do a heavy set of five reps on a calf
raise. Do you feel like your calves are
adequately stimulated? The answer is
most likely not. Which is why when you
see the best lifters when they're
performing these movements, they're not
using those rep ranges. So, if you look
at bodybuilders doing their back, what
are the rep ranges they're using? You
know, eight is at the lowest range and
usually 10 12, you know, and and up,
right? So, for lat pull downs and rows.
So therefore, how do I achieve balance
with this session? So I've done my bench
press. So how do I balance that out? As
I said, I'm not going to do two sets of
five on a pulling exercise. So
therefore, the 1:1 ratio of pushpull
doesn't exist. It's just a guide. Hope
you understand that. So what would I do
uh to balance this out? I like to
consider that I'm going to be applying
the same amount of effort in the
opposing muscle group. So two sets of
five here. What's an equivalent for my
opposing muscles? So, if I'm going to be
doing a lat pull down or a row or
something like that, what's the
equivalent of two pretty big sets of
five? Like, this is a pretty demanding
session. Even though I've only done two
sets, I would say probably like three
sets of 12 is probably what I'm going to
be using to feel like I've performed
equal amount of effort on my pulling
muscles to my pushing muscles. Right?
So, that's what I'm going to be doing.
But the way that I do it is like this. I
like to do agonist antagonist supersets
within my sessions. So, what does that
mean? Push and pull as a superset. So, I
do a set of push and then instead of
sitting here waiting for whatever the
rest period is, for me it's 8 minutes
for these heavy sets. So, I've got two
choices. Sit here and wait 8 minutes,
which is what I did because it's heavy
and that's what I prefer to do,
especially when I'm lifting this heavy.
But a lot of the times if I'm not
lifting this heavy, I'll do a set of
push, wait 3 to four minutes, do a set
of pull, wait 3 to four minutes, and
come back and repeat. Now, what's the
benefits of supersets? I've discussed
this before. It's time saving, and
that's all. And you can understand why.
If I'm resting 8 minutes between each of
these sets, if I do adequate amount of
volume and sets on my session, that's
going to take me a couple hours. But if
you know me well enough, you'll know
that this is where I work. This is where
I live. This is my work. And I do
allocate 2 hours for my session. So,
actually, when I'm lifting this heavy, I
do like to sit down and rest. Uh but if
you're not like me and you are, you
know, you do value your time and you
like to get in and out of the gym, one
of the best ways of having a
structurally balanced approach to
training, which is a really great way of
training, is to do agonist antagonist
supersets where you do your push, you
wait a couple of minutes, do your pull,
wait a couple of minutes, and you come
back and repeat. So either way, this is
what I'm doing first, and this is what I
consider to be standalone. Now, for my
secondary exercises, so the first
exercise of the day is always the
hardest, the heaviest, the highest
relevance to achieving your goal. Then
we consider the secondary exercises. Now
what I like to do with my secondary
exercises, write this down if you want,
is consider the joint angles, ranges of
motion, and muscles that you've
neglected in the main movement. What did
I neglect here with my competition style
wide grip arch bench press? The first
thing that I neglected is that range of
motion, right? So that's the whole
reason why I'm doing that technique is
to reduce the range of motion to shift
more loads. So therefore, I want to
factor that in with my accessory
exercises to make sure I'm not creating
any weak points. So, what's the best
exercise? You got it. Dumbbell pressing.
But the next thing I've already done
flat. So, I'm going to choose a
different angle for my dumbbell presses.
So, one of my favorite combinations to
get pure balance, even though balance is
impossible, but you understand, take
that with a grain of salt, is to pair my
bench pressing with seated dumbbell
shoulder press. Uh, that's a way to
factor in all of the angles that I've
neglected. So, I've done a horizontal
push plane. Now, we go and do some
vertical pushing with my accessory
exercises. And that is something that
I'm not going as heavy. I can't go as
heavy because I'm fatigued now. I've
spent most of my energy on the first
exercise of the day. So now for my
secondary work, I reduce the intensity
and now that's when I am going to be
applying my agonist antagonist
supersets. So now I'm going to be doing
seated dumbbell shoulder press and I'm
going to be pairing that with uh
something that I've included is my
banded pull-ups because I'm not strong
enough to do bodyweight pull-ups because
they're heavy. Two to three top sets of
each of those.
I felt like I was slipping.
Three hardest parts. One, slipping.
two.
Well, lifting it up was like, oh,
and then three, putting it back on that
rack. Pressing was okay. Of course, you
know, bit of effort,
but that's the controlled effort that we
want. I'm going to do one more set of
eight. You know, another topic, two sets
of my top sets. Yeah, that's right. A
lot of the times we're used to seeing
three to five sets, and I write three to
five sets in most instances, except when
you get to a point where you're lifting
pretty heavy. Then it's kind of like one
to two top sets of the heavy exercises.
So
maybe you will agree, I don't know, but
I think that this is heavy.
So that's why two sets is all I'm doing.
Pull-ups I consider the same as pull
downs. Of course, it's a slightly
different exercise, but it's the same
muscle groups, right? And it should
therefore also be the same movement.
So, when I'm doing my pull-ups,
something that I teach people that do
really, really heavy pull-ups is it's
fine if you do that, but your back needs
to look the same as it does on a lat
pull down. So, what does that mean? It
means the technique on a lat pull down
is typically, you know, from a full
stretch to shoulder blades back and
down. Full stretch, shoulder blades back
and down. But then a lot of the times
when people come to their pull-ups, you
see this thing happening. They don't get
the midback recruitment. If your
shoulder blades aren't coming back and
down, if they're not coming together or
going down, you're not using your
midback muscles. Some of you may be
thinking, "That's fine. I'm only doing
it for my lats." If that's the case,
great. But whenever I train my back, I
always like to consider why train my
lats in absence of my midback muscles. I
want them all to be strong together. And
I guess this is coming from a strength
bias.
rather than a bodybuilding bias. So
bodybuilders love have having big lats
and they love to isolate different
exercises to target a specific muscle.
Whereas with me, I like to strengthen
the push pattern and the pull pattern,
horizontal push pattern, vertical push
pattern, horizontal pull pattern,
vertical pull pattern. And from a
function standpoint, that's how I like
to see all of my pull patterns. Full
stretch with a with a full range of
motion in scapular movement as well. So
this is one of my keys for shoulder
health and shoulder balance is to take
it through the fullest range of motion
which is where we hang and stretch and
then we retract and depress. So
protraction and upwards rotation to get
to this point and then retraction
depression to get to that bottom point.
That's why I like to use the band
assistance because quite frankly I like
to do high reps and for me I'm 100 about
102ish kilograms.
That's just too heavy for me to do the
high rep range that I want to do. All
right. Now,
12 reps on that.
If you saw the technique on that, you'll
agree that the last reps I was missing
out on that final bit of scapular
movement, which is retraction
depression. So, for me, that's the
indication of all right, the set is
over.
I'm going to give myself enough rest and
do one more set of each
No,
>> it's only cuz he's banded.
>> That's fine.
>> It's only cuz he's banded. Anyway, time
for um
my third exercise. Well, that was two
and three, but I'm going to be doing my
shoulder health exercise, which is what
I like to finish with. And there's lots
of different choices that I have here.
Sometimes I'll do arms, bit of balance,
but today is my shoulder health day. So,
usually I choose one type of like
shoulder health exercise. So, shoulder
ancillary targeting things like rotator
cuff, so external rotation or lower
trapezius exercise or like face pulls or
seratus anterior. So, these are the
muscles that support the shoulder. So,
the rotator cuff muscles sit on the
scapula and they hold the head of the
humorris, which is the upper arm bone
inside the scapula. But then we also
need to strengthen the muscles that
stabilize the scapula so the rotator
cuff muscles can do their job. So I
usually rotate between different types
of exercises that strengthen that
structure. And at the moment I'm quite
enjoying my rear delt raises. So that's
what I'm going to be doing. Sets of 20
on those when I catch my breath. Thank
you. Thank you.
Did you know
that we have three muscles that
externally rotate the shoulder? So when
people say I'm training rotator cuff,
well depends what exercise because
rotator cuff, there's four muscles and
of the rotator cuff muscles that are
responsible for external rotation is the
infraspanatus ter's minor. And there's
one more muscle and that is the rear
deltoid. So when we strengthen all of
our big pushing muscles that strengthen
pecs, pulling muscles that strengthen
lats, they are strong internal rotators.
And if you want to create balance,
that's why it's a good idea to
strengthen the external rotators.
So those are the three muscles we're
targeting. Infraspanatus, Terry's minor,
and rear deltoid, which is why I love
including rear deltoid work to improve
my shoulder health. And you should, too.
Look at the size of my rear deltoid.
You're welcome.
Does it look big? Honestly,
>> pump.
>> No, no pump.
>> Ah, but does it look like it's a re big
rear delt?
>> We'll see. We'll see. Does it look like
I trained my rear delts?
>> Damn. I got to do more sets. Yeah, it's
probably cuz it's covered on the
tattoos. I got to get the right
lighting.
>> This side is better.
>> Is this side better? Thanks, bro.
So this morning I was watching the
muscle doc Jordan shallows and he put up
a post on front raises for rotator cuff
of all things and he said you know to
strengthen the external rotators. Well
he said rotator cuff but you know we'll
break it down. He said you can do you
know these things. He said, "But you get
to a point where that's kind of like you
need to progress from there." And I
consider these front raises, when I say
I, that's Jordan Shallow's words. I
consider the front raises to be my
favorite rotator cuff exercise.
So, I figured, you know what? Why not?
Why not include them? This is a perfect
time to include them, especially in
light of the whole discussion of
achieving structural balance, hitting my
rear delts
and then hitting my front delts.
Either way, I'll tell you what I
consider this to be a lowcost feel-good
exercise. great way to finish your
session that's not going to interfere
with. So, a lot of the times it's like
you do your main work, don't do all
these other big exercises because we
need to recover.
This isn't going to be energy consuming
enough to need any type of significant
recovery. It's not going to interfere
with the recovery needed for my heavy
bench press work. But, you know what?
When I look in the mirror, my deltoids
look big when I do that. So, I like that
exercise,
man.
But that's a pretty well-rounded deltoid
pump.
Lowcost feel-good exercise. And now I
know because Jordan Shallows is one of
the best physios out there. Sorry, he's
a chiropractor, but forget the name.
Chairo physio, rehabilitation
specialist, biomechanist, understands
this better than most people in the
world because he kind of lives in it. He
lives and breathes it. He's a strong guy
as well. That's what I like about people
that are practitioners, but they live in
the trenches as well. So that's him.
When he says that these are great
exercises, it's like, huh, I'm going to
give it a go. And it feels good. I'm
going to do another set on each of
those. And then that's the end of the
session. So, hope you enjoyed the
education. if you hit the education,
you know, and that's what I try and do
as well. As I said with, you know, guys
like Jordan and many of the people that
I look up to that are practitioners at
the highest level that also live in the
trenches, you know, that's what I try
and do. I'm showing you guys this heavy
lifts. I'm using the techniques that I'm
teaching you that took me 20 years to
learn how to do and I'm showing you in
real time exactly how they work. And if
you want to
just, you know, forget all the
guesswork, don't make the mistakes that
I made, you don't have to. Right? So,
I've made so many mistakes to get to the
position that I'm in now to just give
you these tips and say like, forget all
the that I didn't do or forget all
the that I did wrong. You don't
have to do those things. Just do the
things that I did right. And that's what
I'm doing now. And you should as well.
Anyway, hope you enjoy. See you guys
next time.
So, seriously, what do you think of the
deltoid?
>> It's huge, bro.
>> Thanks, bro.
>> You You mean it.
>> See, that's the thing. It's like I don't
know how to I don't know how to do
bodybuilder poses. I just stand there.